# Selenium

Watir is a joy to work with.  As Alister Scott writes, "Ruby is concise and often a joy to read".  Not all programming languages have that highly readable quality, and Ruby's clarity shouldn't be diminished by the confusing Selenium-Webdriver API.  Although Selenium 2.0 WebDriver is an excellent piece of software, it doesn't have a very high-quality Applications Programming Interface.  It's like trying to write in Assembly code when you should be writing in Perl.  Some things should be written in Assembly, but they are very rare.  The same is true with WebDriver.  There's nothing wrong with the "low-end" WD syntax, but it isn't user-friendly.  Nearly each and every line must begin with "driver.element", and the most important information is hidden deep inside a nest of selector symbols, parentheses and quotations.  This is what users who choose to "upgrade" their Selenium IDE export from Selenium 1 to Selenium 2 will suddenly be confronted with.  Watir is the best choice for programmers who prefer readable code.

No automated testing tool has better name recognition in the computer industry than Selenium, except perhaps for HP Quick Test Pro.  But when it comes to the art of browser automation, Selenium is the leader of the pack.  Selenium 1 Remote Control has a readable and clear syntax, although not as good as Watir, but when it comes to speed and power, Selenium 2 (WebDriver) is clearly the way to go.  Testers who upgrade from Selenium 1 to Selenium 2 and need a readable Applications Programming Interface will be sadly disappointed.  Watir-webdriver is the solution to that problem.  Similarly, the implementations of the Watir syntax in other programming languages is often touted as a superior choice to Selenium as well.  WatiN

The Watir and Firewatir gems (pure watir) are in opposition to Selenium, whereas watir-webdriver is a marriage between the two.  If the paradigm for the internet were commercial, rather than open-source, watir-webdriver would likely never have been created.  Fortunately, there is no financial benefit to either Watir or Selenium in destroying the other framework.  Selenium takes the back-end, and Watir takes the front.  As of the time of this writing, in the winter of 2011-2012, Watir for IE without watir-webdriver is best choice for MSIE, whereas watir-webdriver is the more powerful choice for Firefox.  Watir-webdriver is a translation of Selenium into the clarity of Watir.  Every line of a watir-webdriver script translates directly into code that WebDriver understands.  Selenium can also be accessed directly, via the "driver" method.  The advantage of using the driver method is that more people are dedicating time to Selenium than to watir-webdriver.  Therefore, new features of Selenium can be taken advantage of before they are implemented into watir-webdriver.  The disadvantage of this technique is that it means the watir-webdriver code will be infused with Selenium syntax, thus making it more difficult to understand, and challenging to translate into Watir for Internet Explorer.  For the most part, however, the syntax is the same, and Watir can be translated quite easily into watir-webdriver, or the other way around.  When it comes to Selenium watir-webdriver for firefox, and watir for IE, these two best Ruby automation frameworks have a single thing in common.  They are both Watir.
